Hi there and welcome back.
In this video we are going to talk about Binary Search.
Let's start by looking at the list that we had
in the last video.
Here, we've got a bunch of numbers,
and like you know, if we want to find a specific number
like 90 which is there near the end,
we have to sort of start at the beginning,
and go through each number until we get to 90.
However, there are ways to be more efficient about
searching for a specific number.
If we sort the list first,
which there are various ways of sorting,
some of them are faster than others,
and I'll teach you how to sort a list later on.
But, if you sort the list now it's much easier
to find stuff.
Just in the same way that if you have a dictionary,
you don't start at A and end at Zed.
For example, if you're looking for xylophone,
you'd start near the end cause you'd know
that it's ordered alphabetically.
When your lists and your collections are ordered
it becomes a lot easier to find things.
However, important to say, just because the list
is ordered doesn't mean that automatically
your searches are going to be more efficient,
or the complexity of them is going to be less.
Finding sequentially is still O-N.
If you want to find 90, you still have to start
at the beginning and go through each element,
if you're finding sequentially.
So, let's instead find in a different way.
Let's explore a different way of searching and
finding an element that isn't sequential.
Remember one important aspect about lists
is that you can access any one element,
it doesn't have to be the first element.
So you can access the last element or
an element in the middle if you want.
So let's look for 90 with a slightly different algorithm.
Instead of starting in the first element,
we're going to start in the middle element.
The middle element in this list is 38,
that is index number 10.
So in this algorithm what we're going to do is
we're going to ask the question,
"is 90 greater than 38?"
So again we're looking for 90 and we're just asking
ourselves "is 90 greater than 38?"
The answer is yes, so we're going to discard all
lower values, all the values that are lower or
equal to 38 we're going to discard.
We're only going to keep the values that are
greater than 38.
Why?
Because we know that the list is ordered,
so any value that is to the left is going to be less
than the value we're looking for,
so we don't have to worry about them,
we don't even have to search.
Let's grey them out to signal that we've forgotten
about those values.
We've eliminated them, we're not going to search there.
Then we're going to move over
to the next middle
element of what's left.
Notice that integer division doesn't round up,
so here we end up with four elements on the left
and five elements on the right,
which is a slight problem in this case,
it's going to make things a bit slower for us,
but nonetheless we end up on 59.
So again we ask the same question,
"is 90 greater than 59?"
The answer is yes so we discard again all lower values.
59 and down we can discard because we know that
90 is not in any of those.
Again we look for 90 by moving to the next
middle element of what's left.
Now we're at seven-one-seven.
Again you ask yourself the same question,
"is 90 greater than seven-one-seven?"
The answer this time is no, it's less than seven-one-seven,
so we're going to discard all of the right values
all of the higher values,
we're going to discard them.
Notice now how we've got two values left,
and the next jump takes us to 90.
Because, once again, we don't round up
so two divided by two is one so that brings us
to this index here,
and we ask ourselves the question again,
"is 90 equal to 90?"
And, we say yes, so we found it.
Now we found 90 and it only took us four jumps.
If we had done this sequentially,
it would have take us 17 jumps.
So, I think that this is much faster,
and it just so happens that the log two of 21,
which is the number of elements in this list,
is equal to four point 39.
Which means, that this type of search we've done,
which is called a binary search is actually
oh of log two n.
Which means up to five jumps.
Here we took four jumps,
if we had been looking for 95,
it would have taken us five jumps.
Now, what we've looked at here is a binary search.
A binary search works by, at every jump,
making a decision that leaves you one of two choices.
Go right, or go left.
This binary search means that,
at every jump you're getting rid of half
or approximately half of the elements remaining.
Which is why this is a logarithmic complexity.
The complexity is oh of log two n,
which is much better than O-N.
Indeed, it is an inverse exponential in complexity,
which is much faster.
This kind of search is one of many various search
algorithms that I encourage you to look into
if you are interested.
If not, just know that there are ways of improving on
existing algorithms.
Sequential search can improved on by binary search,
and as such, this performance type subject of
computing is a pretty important area.
Now, in the next few videos we're going to look
at how we can perform binary search on a slightly
different structure that isn't a list.
I'll see you on the next video.